# Charting the Rise of the 737 and A320 as the Dominant Passenger Airliners in the US
## Overview
The objective of this project was to explore and chart how aircraft from two passenger aircraft families, Boeing 737 and Airbus A320, have become the dominant passenger airliners in the domestic US airline travel. I first wanted to chart the long-term historical trend, and then analyze more granually how the market as measured by passengers carried is split among 737, A320 and other type aircraft. After that, I analyzed how the passenger volumes carried by the two aircraft families are split among the various models within the aircraft families.
## Technical Description
My project had three parts: data collection, data analysis and visualization. I downloaded the data from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics website. This was somewhat cumbersome because I did it manually for the each year between 1990 and 2022. Using `python` and `pandas`, I then merged the `csv` files for each year's data to a single dataframe that listed in its rows each aircraft type and in its columns the number of passenger this aircraft had carried in the year question. I then used `pandas` to filter and analyze the data so that I had distinct subsets of passengder data for 737, A320 and other type of aircraft. I used the melt function to create long-format dataframe so that I could use [RAWGraphs](https://www.rawgraphs.io/) to create `svg` files of my streamgraph and treemaps. I then used `illustrator`and [ai2html](http://ai2html.org/) to create the charts. I used `html`and `css` to create the project's webpage.
## Data
Data about the passenger volumens carried by various aircraft is collated by the  the [Bureau of Transportation Statistics data](https://www.transtats.bts.gov/Fields.asp?gnoyr_VQ=FIM). Please note that you have scroll down the page to the section with the Field Name "Aircraft" and then click the "Analysis" link on the "AircraftType" row. All the data is in the `data` folder. The raw data, that is the annual passenger statistics by aircraft type, is the `raw_pax_data` folder. I then the analyzed and processed the data with Python and Pandas. Notebooks and output files of this work are in the `refine_data_notebooks` folder.
## Visualization
 The raw `svg` files I created with `RAWGraphs`and used as the basis of my streamgraph and treemaps are in the `raw_svg` folder. I downloaded public domain photos of a 737 and an A320 from the [image bank](https://images.flydenver.com/browse) maintained by Denver International Airport. I used the `pillow` library to resize the images to the same size and combine them to a composite image. The code to create the photo composite is in the `raw_svg` folder in the `image_comp` as are the original photos.
 ## Webpage
The code and images for the webpage are in the `docs` folder. The webpage is [here](https://juhanarossi.github.io/project-pax-airliners-B737-A320/). I worked with `css` and created a style sheet through trial and error.
## Lessons Learned
This project was about learning responsive graphics and telling a narrative with data. My project is fairly simple and rough on the edges, but doing it taught me a lot. I learnt, for example, to create long-format dataframes and to use `RAWGraphs` to create charts. The next steps for me are to develop my skills futher.